LICENSE TERMS FOR ZEEVO SOFTWARE

The license terms described herein apply to your use of the Zeevo software 
identified below (the "Zeevo Software").  Your use of the Zeevo Software 
indicates your agreement to these terms. If you do not agree to these terms, 
you may not use the Zeevo Software.

The Zeevo Software is licensed for use only in connection with Zeevo's TC2001 
and/or ZV4002 integrated circuits (the "Zeevo Chips"). You may not distribute 
copies of the Zeevo Software except as authorized in writing by Zeevo Inc. 
<http://www.zeevo.com>. You may not modify or otherwise create derivative works 
of the Zeevo Software, except in connection with compiling code.  You may not 
reverse engineer any Zeevo Software delivered in object code or executable form.
  
This license is granted to you by Intel Corporation, in accordance with an 
agreement between Intel and Zeevo.  Zeevo, Inc. is a third party beneficiary 
of this agreement.

THE ZEEVO SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS." INTEL AND ZEEVO EACH DISCLAIM ANY AND 
ALL WARRANTIES AND GUARANTEES, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING BUT 
NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR FITNESS 
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Neither Intel or Zeevo warrants or assumes 
responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of any information, text, 
graphics, links or other items contained within the Zeevo Software.  You 
assume all liability, financial or otherwise, associated with the use, 
distribution or other disposition of the Zeevo Software.

This license constitutes the entire agreement between you and Intel concerning 
the Zeevo Software.  Any addition or modification to these terms must be in a 
written agreement signed by both parties.  This license agreement will be 
governed by Delaware law.  If you are an individual acting on behalf of a 
company or other business entity, you represent that you have the authority to 
bind such entity to these terms, and this agreement is binding upon such entity.

The Zeevo Software includes the following files:

\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\AppDynamicConfig.h
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\AppDynamicScript.sp
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ArmStub.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ArmStublib.a
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\BP_BufferSramVar.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\BP_DummyXramVar.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\Dfu_JumpTbl.sym
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\DynamicScriptConverter.exe
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\GCCStub.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\PreV3FlashManager_115200
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\PreV3FlashManager_921600
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\RM_Rom1.sym
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\RM_Rom2.sym
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\SU_FlashBoot.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\SU_PatchVects.sym
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ScatterFile.txt
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\TOSStub.c
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\TOSUart.o
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\TOSlib.a
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\UartFlashManager
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ZV_Exe_Dfu
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ZvDosFlashTool.exe
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ZvDynamicConfig.h
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ZvDynamicScript.sp
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\ZvWinFlashTool.exe
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\motelib.a
\tinyos-1.x\beta\platform\imote\imotelib\motelib.h

