Moteiv Public Software License
=======================
Version 1.1

Copyright (c) 2005 Moteiv Corporation. All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. The end-user documentation included with the redistribution, if
any, must include the following acknowledgment:

   "This product includes software developed by Moteiv Corporation"

This acknowledgment must appear in the software itself, if and
wherever such third-party acknowledgments normally appear.

4. The names "Moteiv" and "Moteiv Corporation" must not be used to
endorse or promote products derived from this software without prior
written permission. For written permission, please contact
info@moteiv.com.

5. Products derived from this software may not be called "Moteiv", nor
may "Moteiv" appear in their name, without prior written permission of
the Moteiv Corporation.

6. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL MOTEIV CORPORATION OR ITS
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

7.  Any action or suit relating to this software may be brought only
in the courts of a jurisdiction wherein the Moteiv resides or in which
Moteiv conducts its primary business, and under the laws of that
jurisdiction excluding its conflict-of-law provisions. The application
of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods is expressly excluded. Any use of this software outside
the scope of this license or after its termination shall be subject to
the requirements and penalties of the U.S. Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C.
§101 et seq., the equivalent laws of other countries, and
international treaty. This section shall survive the termination of
this license.

8.  All rights under this license shall terminate upon breach of any
of the material terms or conditions of this license and a subsequent
failure to cure such breach in a reasonable period of time after
becoming aware of such noncompliance. If all rights under this license
terminate, use and distribution of this software shall cease as soon
as reasonably practicable. However, any obligations under this license
to the software shall continue and survive.
