SendBigMsg:

Author/Contact:

miklos.maroti@vanderbilt.edu (Miklos Maroti, ISIS, Vanderbilt)
nadand@isis.vanderbilt.edu (Andras Nadas, ISIS, Vanderbilt)
sallai@isis.vanderbilt.edu (Janos Sallai, ISIS, Vanderbilt)

DESCRIPTION:

The SendBigMsg component allows large memory buffers (few KBs) to be 
sent back to the base station. The memory region does not have to be 
continuous, which allows the use of circular buffers on the motes. The 
SendBigMsg component automatically cuts and pastes the data of the 
memory region into regular message packets. The packets contain a 
sequence number and are transmitted in order. Each packet is retried 
several times if no acknowledgment is received. The base station must 
run the GenericBase application which forwards all messages to a PC 
connected to the base station. PrintBigMsgs (command line java program) 
or BigMSGDisplay (MessageCenter applet) can be used to view/save the 
message contents.

THE JAVA PROGRAMS:

The java program (PrintBigMsgs) displays each BigMsg in a line. The 
program can connect to a SerialForward application, or can use the 
serial port directly. The program does not display corrupted or partial 
messages.

The MessageCenter applet BigMSGDisplay displays each BigMsg in a line, 
cropped at the 2048th byte. It can save the BigMsg in text or binary 
format (without cropping).

TUNABLE PARAMETERS:

The SendBigMsg component can be configured by changing the following 
value in BigMsg.h:

BIGMSG_RETRY_COUNT: The number of retries of each packet. If no 
acknowledgment is received for this many times, then the rest of the big 
message is not transmitted. The default value is 5.

PROTOCOL:

BigMsg uses active message type 111 (0x6f). The packet header contains 
the two byte long sender address and a one byte long sequence number. 
The sequence number of the first packet is 0xff. The fist four bytes of 
the first packet contain the 32-bit BigMsg size in Big Endian byte 
order. For each subsequent packet, the sequence number is incremented by 
one and the highest bit is cleared (AND-ed with 0x7f). Each packet is 
rebroadcast BIGMSG_RETRY_COUNT times or until it is acknowledged.

